---
kernelspec:
  name: python3
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
thebe: true
---

# Visualisation

For the educational and interactive requirement given by the client, a method of giving visual feedback, which represents the sound heard, should be given to the user. This visualization had to be both real-time and easy to read.

## Design Description

The PyQT library has been chosen to be used for the real-time plotting. This has been chosen due to its ability to show real-time plots and the ease of creating a GUI with it, which makes testing more efficient.

The signal processing group of the project handles the waveform generation, which is given in the form of chunks of 512 samples with a sample frequency of 44.1 kHz. To form a smooth wave representation, each chunk will be added into a larger chunk of 1024 samples, then shifted to the left so that another chunk can be added.

Three different ways of visualizing the sound are being used.

The first is the waveform, represented in a time-versus-amplitude graph. This is used to show the waveform, which can be compared to the sound heard by the students.

The second visualization is the frequency domain representation of the wave. The frequency-domain representation is obtained using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm implemented in the SciPy library. The FFT efficiently computes the discrete-time fourier transform, defined as:

$$
y[k] = \sum_{n=0}^{N-1} e^{-2\pi j \frac{kn}{N}} x[n]
$$

For this visualisation, a logarithmic frequency axis has been chosen. This has several reasons; first of all, musical notes are logarithmically divided so a lotharimic representation makes more sense. Secondly, a large range of the frequency axis is needed to show all the harmonics, especially for blockwaves and sawtooth waves. 

The third visualization used is the waterfall spectrogram. This spectrogram is created using the `scipy.signal` spectrogram function. However, this function is only able to create a waterfall plot of a complete signal. Therefore, a spectrogram is calculated for each incoming audio chunk. The resulting spectral data are appended to a rolling buffer, producing a continuously updating waterfall display.

Another visualization created is the note visualization. This visualization shows the notes that are being played by the theremin. For this, the frequency is transformed into MIDI notation via the following formula:

$$
n = 69 + 12 \log_2\!\left(\frac{f}{440}\right)
$$

The result of this formula is a number. To convert it to a note, we take the modulus of 12 of this number and use it as an index in an array of note labels. For the octave we divide the number by 12, subtract 1 and round it down to an integer:

```python
note_labels = ['C', 'C#', 'D', 'D#', 'E', 'F', 'F#', 'G', 'G#', 'A', 'A#', 'B']
note = note_labels[n % 12]
octave = n // 12 -1
```

To visualize these notes in a way to into a way that students without a musical background feel more familiar with has been done by representing the notes by viaulizing a piano and showing which key closed to the sound heard. To make this piano, simple white rectangles are drawn based on the minimal and the maximal midi value. The values chosen are:

```python
midi_min = 21 
midi_max = 108
```

These values are chosen according to the minimal and maximal midi values of a full piano. 


## Evaluation and Testing Method
FFor validation of the visualization software, several prerecorded WAV files were used as test signals. At the time of development, the signal-generation subsystem and UART communication interface were still under active development by another project subgroup. Therefore, audio files containing known waveforms were used as reproducible test inputs. 

Three different waveforms have been tested and the resulting visualisation had been compared to the theoratical outputs. Also, a wavefile with alternating frequencies and amplitudes has been tested to make sure alternating frequencies would not be an issue for the code.

In the final version of the theremin the wave selection is being done by a potmeter, however for testing a selector in the graphical user interface has been used to select the different visuals. 


## Actual code
