# Micro Processor Subsystem

## Theory

As a result of the required functionalities of the microprocessor and the choice of the Raspberry Pi 4B (RPi), the more specific theory can be explored. The exploration of the features of the RPi lends the ability to achieve the functionalities. 

### Software
To run the required software some installations are needed.

#### Operating System
First of all, a Raspberry Pi runs an operating system (OS). This OS allows for controll of all systems on the RPi. On purchase the RPi requires an SD card with a flash of the latest version of [Raspberry Pi OS](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/operating-systems/). From there the RPi can be accessed by its HDMI and USB ports and powered using a USB C.

#### Installing Dependencies
With access to the RPi shell, all dependencies and files can be installed. Using the following bash commands, the `<library name>` can be installed.

Always making sure to have the latest software.
```bash
sudo apt upgrade
```

Installing C/C++ libraries
```bash
sudo apt install <library name>
```

Installing python libraries
```bash
sudo apt install python3-<library name>
```

A list of dependencies for this project is listed in []().

#### Automatic Execution
For the purpose of this project, a plug and play implementation is required. As the RPi is usually operated using a keyboard, mouse and screen this is not the default case for programs that are on the RPi. The RPi can execute programs at boot and at login. At boot the program has access to all systems on the board itself, including the audio system, GPIO pins and internal hardwired ip addresses. At login the systems that are connected to the RPi become available, including a display. The method to run files at boot is listed in detail [here](https://www.thedigitalpictureframe.com/ultimate-guide-systemd-autostart-scripts-raspberry-pi/).

### Communication UART
For the RPi, no extra library needs to be installed to be able to access the serial port. `termios` and `fcntl` are pre installed libraries, which access the serial port and can initialise the port with certain settings such as Baud rate, input/output mode. The following scheme is schetched in the [wiki on Termios:](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Serial_Programming/termios) @noauthor_serial_nodate

1. Open serial device.

1. Configure communication parameters.

1. Use standard Unix system calls read and write.

1. Close serial device.

The device name of the UART ports on the GPIO pins is `"/dev/ttyS0"`.

The communication parameters: `options.c_cflag`, `options.c_lflag`, `options.c_oflag` and `options.c_iflag`, or control, local, output and input flags. These parameters can be altered for the desired communication form. For simplicity a common implementation is best, where the Baud rate is 115200, readmode is activated and forcing 8-bit mode for ASCII character transmission. The opening and configuration of the serial port is shown in the code block below.

```c++
void set_interface_attribs(void)
{
    //Open uart
    uart0_filestream = open("/dev/ttyS0", O_RDWR | O_NOCTTY);		//Open in non blocking read/write mode
    if (uart0_filestream == -1) {
        //ERROR - CAN'T OPEN SERIAL PORT
        printf("Error: Unable to open UART\n");
    }

    //Configure uart
    
    tcgetattr(uart0_filestream, &options);

    cfsetispeed(&options, B115200);
    cfsetospeed(&options, B115200);

    options.c_cflag |= (CLOCAL | CREAD);
    options.c_cflag &= ~PARENB;
    options.c_cflag &= ~CSTOPB;
    options.c_cflag &= ~CSIZE;
    options.c_cflag |= CS8;

    options.c_lflag = 0;
    options.c_oflag = 0;
    options.c_iflag = IGNPAR;

    options.c_cc[VMIN]  = 1;
    options.c_cc[VTIME] = 1;

    tcsetattr(uart0_filestream, TCSANOW, &options);
}
```

### Sample Generation & Waveform Manipulation
To generate audio of a certain form batches of samples need to be generated before being sent in buffers to an audio device. Two different methods are considered for this, where one is a lookup table made beforehand and the other uses functions calculating the samples' magnitude on the fly. The lookup table works quite well in specific situations, however, the accuracy in output frequency is determined by the number of samples in this lookup table. This is not the case for function based sample generation and the execution time difference is not noteworthy.

(subsubsec-phase)=
#### Continuous Phase
The batches of samples generated need to fit together and should not have jumps if the waveform is continuous. To omit this a relative phase variable is used to keep track of the step instead of beginning at zero at each new buffer generation. This phase is kept between $0$ and $2\pi$, by subtracting $2\pi$ when it is exceeded. Each phase step is then additively variated by adding the time between samples to the phase like in [](#phase adding). Here $\phi(i)$ is the phase, $f$ is the current frequency and $f_s$ the sampling frequency.

```{math}
:label: eq-phase-adding

\phi(i) = \phi(i-1) + \frac{2\pi f}{f_s}
```

#### Functions
The following functions are used to generate the Sine, Block and Triangle wave. In the equations below the $A$ represents the amplitude sent from the micro controller and $\phi(i)$ represents the current phase.

1. Sine
C++ has a library, `<math.h>`, that has a sin function built in, so the function becomes:
```{math}
:label: eq-sin-gen

\text{buffer}[i] = 2^{\text{\#DAC bits}-1} \cdot A \sin(\phi(i))
```

2. Block
For the block wave the output should be the minimum for half the phase and maximum for the other half so the function becomes:

```{math}
:label: eq-block-gen

\text{buffer}[i] = 
\begin{cases}
    -2^{\text{\#DAC bits}-1} \cdot A & \quad \phi \leq \pi\\ 
    2^{\text{\#DAC bits}-1} \cdot A & \quad \phi > \pi
\end{cases}
```

3. Triangle
For the triangle wave, the output should ramp up for half the phase from minimal to maximal amplitude and ramp down for the other half from maximum back to minimum, so the function becomes

```{math}
:label: eq-triangle-gen

\text{buffer}[i] = 
\begin{cases}
    2^{\text{\#DAC bits}-1} \cdot A (\frac{2\phi(i)}{\pi}-1) & \quad \phi \leq \pi\\ 
    2^{\text{\#DAC bits}-1} \cdot A (\frac{2(\pi-\phi(i))}{\pi}+1) & \quad \phi > \pi
\end{cases}
```


### Audio Output
For accessing the audio card of the RPi in C/C++, the ALSA sound library API is used. This can access the output devices and send samples from the 3.5mm jack. @noauthor_alsa_nodate To use the alsa library the API should be installed.
```bash
sudo apt install alsa-utils libasound2-dev alsa-tools
```
For compilation and building your C/C++ files, append the -lasound to your compile and build commands.

The API requires the definition of some parameters. These parameters include the format, access, number of channels, sample rate, soft_resample and latency. The latency determines how much latency is allowed for samples to be sent, otherwise the software underruns. An implementation of initialising the audio card and setting the parameters is given below.

```c++
// Audio
int err;
snd_pcm_t *handle;
// Open and configure the playback device
err = snd_pcm_open(&handle, "hw:CARD=Headphones", SND_PCM_STREAM_PLAYBACK, 0);
if (err < 0) {
    fprintf(stderr, "Playback open error: %s\n", snd_strerror(err));
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
}

err = snd_pcm_set_params(handle,
                            SND_PCM_FORMAT_S16_LE,
                            SND_PCM_ACCESS_RW_INTERLEAVED,
                            1, SAMPLE_RATE, 1, 40000);
if (err < 0) {
    fprintf(stderr, "Hardware configuration error: %s\n", snd_strerror(err));
    snd_pcm_close(handle);
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
}
```

Frames can then be sent using the following `C++` code.
```c++
// Send frames to ALSA pipeline
snd_pcm_sframes_t frames = snd_pcm_writei(handle, buffer, BUFFER_SIZE);
if (frames < 0) {
    frames = snd_pcm_recover(handle, frames, 0);
}
if (frames < 0) {
    fprintf(stderr, "snd_pcm_writei failed: %s\n", snd_strerror(frames));
    break;
}
```

#### Sample Rate

According to the subsystem requirements, the base tones of the audio that is to be generated reach to approximately 3000Hz. According to the Nyquist condition ($f_s\geq 2B$), sampling should be done at at least twice this frequency. However, keeping in mind the sine, block and triangle forms, only the block waveform can be reliably and recognisably generated. Additionaly, for modularity for future improvements, different audio waveforms may be used, such as, more complex instrument recordings. For this reason it was chosen to look at sampling rates common in audio systems. Due to the audible hearing limit lying at 20kHz, a sampling frequency of at least 40kHz is needed, inlcuding a margin to omit sampling only nodes. This is the reason many audio signals are sampled at 44.1kHz (CDs for example). Currently higher sampling rates are used as well, below in [](#tab-sound) the different purposes for different sampling rates in audio are layed out. @noauthor_audio_2024

:::{table}
:label: tab-sound
:align: center
| Sample rate   | Use case  |
| :---          | :---      |
| 44.1kHz       | Standard for music CDs |
| 48kHz         | Standard for audio in film and video |
| 96kHz and 192kHz | High quality audio production |

Different sampling rate use cases in digital audio processing.
:::
The ALSA library has a default setting of 48kHz and will resample audio of a different rate. @noauthor_alsa_nodate In the end, it is chosen to keep the sampling rate at 48kHz, so that no extra configuration is needed and more complex audio fragments can be used in future implementations.

#### Buffer Size

### GPIO Control

### Communication Visualisation